Add OAuth 2.0 documentation (#2968)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: docs/core/platform/oauth2.md

Reviewer: Make it clear what session this is and use the correct API to ensure the token is fresh.

---
title: "OAuth 2.0 support"
---

Integrations that connect to cloud services often need to authenticate users via OAuth 2.0. Home Assistant provides a set of helpers in `homeassistant.helpers.config_entry_oauth2_flow` that handle the OAuth 2.0 flow, token storage, and token refresh lifecycle — so integrations don't have to implement this themselves.

This page covers how to implement OAuth 2.0 in an integration, how to handle errors and best practices.

Before reading this page, make sure you are familiar with [Application credentials](/docs/core/platform/application_credentials) and [Config entries](/docs/config_entries_index).

## Overview

Home Assistant's OAuth 2.0 helper provides:

- A built-in Authorization Code flow via `config_entry_oauth2_flow`.
- Automatic token refresh when an access token expires.
- A session helper (`OAuth2Session`) for making authenticated API requests.
- Error handling via a set of semantic exceptions

The helper supports two credential approaches, both of which require `application_credentials` support.

> It's encouraged to use the built-in `config_entry_oauth2_flow` for standard Authorization Code flows, but the underlying `AbstractOAuth2Implementation` can be extended to suit specific needs.

Reviewer: We can suggest to use the existing template flows we have that inherit `AbstractOAuth2FlowHandler` first and only build your own child flow class when it's really needed.

### Reauthentication

Home Assistant can will handle the token refresh lifecycle, by calling `async_ensure_token_valid`. However, if a token becomes permanently invalid (for example, if the user revokes access from the provider's website), Home Assistant will trigger a reauthentication flow. To support this, add `async_step_reauth` in your config flow:

```python
async def async_step_reauth(
    self, entry_data: Mapping[str, Any]
) -> ConfigFlowResult:
    """Handle reauthentication."""
    return await self.async_step_reauth_confirm()

async def async_step_reauth_confirm(
    self, user_input: dict[str, Any] | None = None
) -> ConfigFlowResult:
    """Confirm reauthentication."""
    if user_input is None:
        return self.async_show_form(step_id="reauth_confirm")
    return await self.async_step_user()
```

## Making authenticated API requests

Use `OAuth2Session` to make authenticated requests. It automatically injects a valid access token into each request and handles token refresh transparently.

```python
from homeassistant.helpers import config_entry_oauth2_flow

session = config_entry_oauth2_flow.OAuth2Session(hass, entry, implementation)

> # The session handles token refresh, inside the library, automatically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The session handles token refresh, inside the library, when `async_ensure_token_valid` is called. This must be called before every request.
```

response = await session.async_request("GET", "https://api.example.com/data")
```

For all integrations that use an external API client library, pass the token directly:

```python
access_token = await session.async_get_access_token()
client = ExternalApiClient(token=access_token)
```

### `async_get_access_token` vs `async_ensure_token_valid`

Both methods ensure a valid token is available, but behave differently:

> - `async_ensure_token_valid()` - refreshes the token if needed but does **not** return the token. This needs to done before every request to ensure there's a valid token.

Reviewer: Maybe explain that the `token` property on the session will return the token?

- A built-in Authorization Code flow via `config_entry_oauth2_flow`.
- Automatic token refresh when an access token expires.
- A session helper (`OAuth2Session`) for making authenticated API requests.
- Error handling via a set of semantic exceptions

The helper supports two credential approaches, both of which require `application_credentials` support.

It's encouraged to use the built-in `config_entry_oauth2_flow` for standard Authorization Code flows, but the underlying `AbstractOAuth2Implementation` can be extended to support any OAuth 2.0 flow.

## Supported OAuth 2.0 flows

| Flow                         | Class                                               | When to use                     |
| ---------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Client Credentials           | `LocalOAuth2Implementation`                         | Standard browser-based flow     |
| Client Credentials with PKCE | `LocalOAuth2ImplementationWithPkce`                 | When the provider requires PKCE |
| Device Authorization         | `AbstractOAuth2Implementation` (under construction) | For devices without a browser   |

> | Custom                       | `AbstractOAuth2Implementation`                      | Any non-standard flow           |

Reviewer: Yes.

- `OAuth2TokenRequestReauthError` raises `ConfigEntryAuthFailed`, triggering a reauthentication flow
- `OAuth2TokenRequestTransientError` treated as `UpdateFailed`, triggering the coordinator's retry mechanism

### Integrations without a Data Update Coordinator

If your integration does **not** use a coordinator, you must handle the exceptions explicitly wherever you call `async_get_access_token()` or `async_ensure_token_valid()`:

```python
from homeassistant.helpers.config_entry_oauth2_flow import (
    OAuth2TokenRequestError,
    OAuth2TokenRequestReauthError,
    OAuth2TokenRequestTransientError,
)
from homeassistant.exceptions import ConfigEntryAuthFailed, ConfigEntryNotReady

try:
    await session.async_get_access_token()
except OAuth2TokenRequestReauthError as err:
    raise ConfigEntryAuthFailed(
        translation_domain=DOMAIN,
        translation_key="reauth_required",
    ) from err
except (OAuth2TokenRequestTransientError, OAuth2TokenRequestError) as err:
    raise ConfigEntryNotReady(
        translation_domain=DOMAIN,
        translation_key="auth_server_error",
    ) from err
```

> ### Migration from `aiohttp.ClientResponseError`

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should document the migration here. I think we should just document how it should be going forward. We have the blog post for the migration.
